DECENTRALIZED IDENTITY SYSTEMS: UNDER THE HOOD

This is the second part of a two-part series. Part one, Decentralized Identity Systems Concepts (https://www.neteye-blog.com/blog/2026/06/19/decentralized-identity-systems-concepts/), introduced the why and the what. This article explains the how.

Part one established the core idea: instead of a central identity provider sitting in the middle of every trust relationship, users hold digitally signed credentials in a wallet, issuers sign those credentials, and verifiers check them — without needing to call the issuer every time.

This article builds on that foundation and explains the technical mechanisms that make it work. It covers decentralized identifiers, DID documents, trust systems, open standards, the issuance and verification flows, and how Microsoft Entra Verified ID implements all of this in practice. It also covers Face Check and the integration with Entra ID Governance Access Packages.

Decentralized Identifiers

Every participant in a decentralized identity ecosystem — a person, an organization, a device — can be represented by a Decentralized Identifier, or DID.

A DID is a portable, globally unique URI that follows a three-part structure defined by the W3C DID specification (https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/):

    did:method:specific-identifier

For example:

    did:web:contoso.com
    did:ion:EiAbc123...

The three parts are:

- Scheme — always did
- Method — defines how the DID is created, resolved, updated, and deactivated (for example, web or ion)
- Method-specific identifier — a unique string generated according to the rules of the method

DIDs are important for two reasons. First, they are self-owned: unlike a username or email address managed by a third-party provider, a DID belongs to the entity that created it. Second, they are portable: because they follow an open standard, credentials tied to a DID can be moved between wallet applications without needing to be reissued.

DID Documents

Resolving a DID — looking it up, the same way you look up a domain name with DNS — returns a DID Document. This is a structured JSON file that contains the technical anchors needed to verify anything signed by that DID.

A DID Document deliberately contains no personal claims. Its contents are purely cryptographic and structural:

- Verification methods — the public key material used to verify signatures
- Authentication — which keys can be used to prove control of the DID
- Service endpoints — locations used to interact with the DID subject

Here is a simplified example of a DID Document:

    {
      "@context": [
        "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1",
        "https://w3id.org/security/suites/ed25519-2020/v1"
      ],
      "id": "did:example:123456789abcdefghi",
      "authentication": [{
        "id": "did:example:123456789abcdefghi#keys-1",
        "type": "Ed25519VerificationKey2020",
        "controller": "did:example:123456789abcdefghi",
        "publicKeyMultibase": "zH3C2AVvLMv6gmMNam3uVAjZpfkcJCwDwnZn6z3wXmqPV"
      }]
    }

The controller field names the entity that has the authority to update the document. The public key in the authentication section is what verifiers use to check that a credential or presentation was really signed by the claimed DID.

[Image: Decentralized Identifier Architecture]
The DID Document sits at the root of all cryptographic trust. It contains no personal data — only the public keys and endpoints needed to verify signatures and locate services.

The Trust System

DID Documents need to be stored somewhere they can be retrieved reliably and tamper-evidently. That storage infrastructure is called the Trust System, or more formally, the Verifiable Data Registry.

The Trust System plays a central role in decoupling the participants. Because issuers publish their DID Documents to the Trust System, verifiers can retrieve the issuer's public key at any time without needing to contact the issuer directly. The same applies to the holder's DID.

Today, Microsoft Entra Verified ID uses DID:Web as its trust system. It's worth understanding how the platform got here, because the earlier design choice explains a lot about how the Trust System concept works in general.

DID:Web — Anchored on a Web Domain

DID:Web (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/how-to-register-didwebsite) is a simple, permission-based method that ties a DID to an organization's existing web domain. There is no blockchain involved.

How it works:

1. Microsoft Entra generates a did.json file containing the organization's public keys and service endpoints.
2. That file is hosted at a well-known location: https://[your-domain]/.well-known/did.json
3. Any wallet or verifier can resolve the DID by fetching that file over standard HTTPS.

A DID:Web identity looks like this: did:web:contoso.com. The trust anchor is the organization's existing DNS and web reputation — the same infrastructure that powers HTTPS certificates today.

DID:Web is cheaper and faster to set up than a blockchain-anchored method, and it produces a branded, human-readable DID. The trade-off is that it depends on the web domain remaining operational and under the organization's control.

DID:ION — a Bitcoin-Anchored Method, Now Retired from Verified ID

ION (Identity Overlay Network) (https://github.com/decentralized-identity/ion) is a public, permissionless DID network developed in partnership with the Decentralized Identity Foundation (https://identity.foundation/). It implements the Sidetree protocol (https://identity.foundation/sidetree/spec/) as a Layer 2 overlay on the Bitcoin blockchain, batching many identity operations into a single Bitcoin transaction and relying only on Bitcoin's block ordering for consensus — no separate token or validator set required.

ION is a useful illustration of what a maximally decentralized, permissionless Trust System looks like: once a DID is anchored to Bitcoin, the record survives independently of any single company or service. If you like: even if Microsoft's services disappeared tomorrow, a did:ion record anchored to Bitcoin would remain resolvable.

That said, this is no longer how Microsoft Entra Verified ID actually works in production. Verified ID supported did:ion only as a preview option, and Microsoft ended that support in December 2023. Any tenant still running a did:ion authority needs to migrate to did:web, which requires reissuing all outstanding credentials under the new authority — there is no in-place conversion. New deployments are configured on did:web from the start.

Characteristic: Underlying infrastructure
DID:ION (historical): Bitcoin blockchain (Layer 2)
DID:Web (current): Web domain (HTTPS + DNS)

Characteristic: Permissionless
DID:ION (historical): Yes
DID:Web (current): No

Characteristic: Immutability
DID:ION (historical): Very high (Bitcoin-anchored)
DID:Web (current): Domain-dependent

Characteristic: Status in Microsoft Entra Verified ID
DID:ION (historical): Retired since December 2023
DID:Web (current): Current, only supported method

Characteristic: DID readability
DID:ION (historical): Long opaque string
DID:Web (current): Branded domain name

The practical takeaway: if you're planning a new Verified ID deployment, DID:Web is not "the practical default" among several options — it's simply the trust system the platform uses. The interesting design question isn't which method to pick, but whether the branded, domain-anchored trust model of DID:Web is an acceptable trade-off for your scenario, given that it ties your identity infrastructure to the continued availability of your domain.

Open Standards

One of the most important design decisions in decentralized identity is that it is built on open, interoperable standards rather than proprietary protocols. This is what makes credentials portable across vendors.

W3C Verifiable Credentials

The W3C Verifiable Credentials Data Model (https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/) defines the structure of a verifiable credential: a set of claims about a subject, together with metadata and a cryptographic proof. Any issuer that follows this standard produces credentials that any compliant verifier can process.

A verifiable credential includes:

- Claims — the statements being made about the subject (for example, employment status, age, qualifications)
- Metadata — issuer DID, issuance date, expiry date, credential schema
- Proof — the issuer's cryptographic signature over the credential content

OpenID for Verifiable Credential Issuance

The OpenID for Verifiable Credential Issuance (OID4VCI) (https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html) specification defines the API an issuer exposes so that a wallet can request and receive verifiable credentials. Access to this API is authorized using OAuth 2.0, which means existing authorization infrastructure can be reused.

OpenID for Verifiable Presentations

The OpenID for Verifiable Presentations (OID4VP) (https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.html) specification defines how a holder presents credentials to a verifier. The verifier issues an authorization request, the wallet assembles a Verifiable Presentation — a holder-signed package containing one or more credentials — and returns it. Access is again authorized through OAuth 2.0.

SIOP v2 — Self-Issued OpenID Provider

SIOPv2 (https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-self-issued-v2-1_0.html) extends OpenID Connect with the concept of a Self-Issued OpenID Provider: an OpenID Provider that is controlled by the user, not by a third-party service such as Google or Microsoft.

With SIOPv2, the wallet itself acts as the OpenID Provider. The user signs their own ID Token with a key they control. There is no central identity provider in the loop. Relying parties trust the self-issued token because it is signed with a key they can verify against the holder's DID Document.

SIOPv2 can be combined with OID4VP, which allows a relying party to receive both an authenticated identity token and verified credential claims from a third-party issuer in a single flow.

[Image: SIOP v2 Flow]
In the SIOP v2 flow, the user's wallet acts as the OpenID Provider. The relying party receives a self-signed ID token without involving any centralized identity provider.

Verifiable Credentials and Verifiable Presentations

Two data structures sit at the center of every decentralized identity interaction.

A Verifiable Credential (VC) is created and signed by an issuer. It contains claims about a subject and is tamper-evident: any modification to the credential after signing will break the cryptographic proof.

A Verifiable Presentation (VP) is created and signed by the holder. It wraps one or more verifiable credentials and proves that the holder is the legitimate owner of the credentials they are presenting.

The dual-signature structure is deliberate:

- The issuer's signature on the VC proves that the credential is authentic and was issued by the claimed party.
- The holder's signature on the VP proves that the person presenting the credentials is the same individual they were issued to.

A verifier checks both: first that the VC was issued by a trusted party (by resolving the issuer's DID and verifying the signature against the issuer's public key), then that the VP was constructed by the legitimate holder (by resolving the holder's DID and verifying the holder's signature).

This two-layer check is what makes decentralized credentials resistant to forgery and theft.

The Issuance Flow

The diagram below illustrates how a verifiable credential flows from issuer to holder.

[Image: Microsoft Verified ID — How It Works]

The steps are:
1. The holder requests a credential. Using their wallet (Microsoft Authenticator), the employee or user initiates a credential request, often by scanning a QR code or clicking a deep link on the issuer's website or app.
2. The issuer authenticates the holder. Before issuing the credential, the issuer verifies the user's identity through an existing authentication mechanism (for example, Entra ID sign-in, or an identity proofing step).
3. Claims are assembled. The issuer collects the claims to include in the credential, drawing on verified internal records such as HR data, student records, or government databases.
4. The credential is signed. The issuer signs the credential with its private key, which is stored securely in Azure Key Vault. The corresponding public key is available in the issuer's DID Document on the Trust System.
5. The credential is delivered to the wallet. The signed credential is sent to the holder's wallet application via the OID4VCI protocol and stored on the holder's device.

At no point does the issuer need to retain a copy of the issued credential. The signed credential belongs to the holder.

The Verification Flow

When the holder needs to prove something to a verifier, the flow works in the opposite direction.

[Image: Microsoft Verified ID — Interaction Flow]
1. The verifier sends a presentation request. The verifier's application (for example, a partner company's onboarding portal) issues a request specifying which credential types and claims it needs. This request reaches the wallet typically via a QR code or deep link.
2. The wallet presents the credentials. The holder reviews the request in Microsoft Authenticator, consents to share, and the wallet assembles a Verifiable Presentation signed with the holder's private key.
3. The verifier retrieves the issuer's public key. Using the issuer's DID, the verifier resolves the DID through the Trust System (did:web) to retrieve the issuer's DID Document and extract the public key.
4. The verifier checks the credential signature. The verifier uses the issuer's public key to confirm the credential was genuinely issued by the claimed issuer and has not been tampered with.
5. The verifier checks the presentation signature. The verifier uses the holder's public key to confirm the presentation was constructed by the legitimate owner.
6. The verifier checks the credential status. The verifier can also check whether the credential has been revoked by the issuer, using the revocation registry referenced in the credential's metadata.
7. Access is granted. If all checks pass, the verifier grants the requested access, service, or benefit.

The verifier never needs to contact the issuer directly. Everything is resolved through the Trust System.

Microsoft Entra Verified ID Architecture

Microsoft Entra Verified ID is Microsoft's managed service for implementing the issuer and verifier roles in this ecosystem. It abstracts much of the cryptographic and infrastructure complexity, exposing a REST API that developers use to request credential issuance and verification.

[Image: Microsoft Verified ID Architecture]

The main components are:

Azure Key Vault

All private keys used to sign verifiable credentials are generated and stored in Azure Key Vault (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/key-vault/general/overview). The keys never leave the vault; signing operations are performed inside it. This gives organizations cryptographic proof of their identity without exposing private key material to their own application code.

Microsoft Authenticator as the Wallet

Microsoft Authenticator (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/verifiable-credentials-configure-tenant-quick) is the wallet app for Microsoft Entra Verified ID. It handles:

- Creating and managing the holder's DID
- Receiving credential issuance requests and storing issued credentials
- Assembling and signing Verifiable Presentations on demand
- Performing Face Check liveness scans (discussed below)

While other wallet SDKs exist for custom implementations, Microsoft Authenticator is required for the most advanced features of the platform.

Setup Options: Quick vs. Advanced

When an organization sets up Microsoft Entra Verified ID, there are two configuration paths:

Quick Setup — Microsoft hosts the did.json file and manages the Key Vault configuration. This is the fastest way to start, but it produces a DID that contains the Entra tenant ID rather than a recognizable domain name (for example, did:web:verifiedid.entra.microsoft.com/tenantid/...). This is fine for testing and development but less suitable for production deployments where brand trust matters.

Advanced Setup — The organization hosts its own did.json file at https://[your-domain]/.well-known/did.json and configures its own Key Vault. This produces a branded DID such as did:web:contoso.com. The Microsoft Authenticator app displays a Verified badge next to the issuer's name when the DID resolves to a known domain, which builds holder confidence.

Both paths configure a did:web authority — the choice here is about branding and operational control, not about which trust system underpins the identifier.

[Image: Microsoft Verified ID — Architecture Choice of Trust System]
Quick Setup and Advanced Setup both use DID:Web. The difference is who hosts the did.json file and Key Vault — Microsoft, or the organization itself — which determines whether the resulting DID carries the organization's own domain name.

Face Check: High-Assurance Identity Verification

Presenting a credential proves that someone has access to the wallet. It does not by itself prove that the person holding the phone is the same person the credential was issued to. That gap is closed by Face Check.

Face Check is an advanced feature of Microsoft Entra Verified ID, powered by Azure AI Vision (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/using-facecheck). When a verifier requests a Face Check:

1. The Microsoft Authenticator app prompts the holder to take a live selfie.
2. Azure AI performs a liveness detection check to confirm that the selfie is not a photograph or deepfake.
3. The live selfie is compared against the photo claim embedded in the holder's verifiable credential (typically sourced from the holder's Entra ID profile photo or a government ID credential).
4. The result is returned to the verifier as a confidence score only. The actual photo and biometric data are never shared with or stored by the verifier — nor retained by Microsoft Authenticator, Verified ID, or Azure AI once the check completes.

The confidence score thresholds are statistically significant:

- The minimum confidence score of 50% corresponds to a false positive rate of 1 in 100,000
- A 90% confidence score corresponds to a false positive rate of 1 in 1,000,000,000 (one in a billion)

This makes Face Check suitable for the highest-assurance scenarios: privileged access grants, help desk account recovery, and remote onboarding checks where the risk of social engineering or impersonation is highest.

A well-known example of where Face Check would have helped: the September 2023 breach at MGM Resorts, in which attackers used a short social-engineering phone call to persuade the IT help desk to reset a privileged account's credentials, ultimately compromising the company's identity infrastructure. A Face Check requirement tied to a verifiable credential would have required the caller to produce both the credential and a live biometric match before any reset could proceed.

Access Packages and Entra ID Governance

Microsoft Entra Verified ID integrates with Entra ID Governance (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/id-governance/entitlement-management-overview) through Access Packages.

An Access Package is a bundle of IT resources — applications, group memberships, SharePoint sites, Microsoft Teams — that an employee needs to perform a role. Entitlement Management automates how users request, approve, and lose access to these bundles over time.

The integration with Verified ID allows an organization to add a credential presentation requirement to an Access Package policy. Before access is granted, the user must:

1. Present a valid Verifiable Credential (for example, an employee onboarding credential or an identity proofing credential from a trusted third party such as CLEAR)
2. Optionally, pass a Face Check against the photo in that credential

This combination — credential presentation plus live biometric match — provides a much stronger assurance than password-based access alone. It ensures that the person requesting privileged access is the same person whose identity was verified at onboarding, and that they are physically present with their wallet.

End-to-End: A Practical Scenario

To make the technical pieces concrete, here is how they combine in a realistic enterprise scenario.

Situation: Woodgrove Inc wants to allow its employees to prove their employment status to a partner company, Proseware, without setting up a federation link between the two Entra tenants.

Step: 1
Actor: Woodgrove HR
Action: Sets up Microsoft Entra Verified ID with Advanced Setup (DID:Web on did:web:woodgrove.com)

Step: 2
Actor: Woodgrove IT
Action: Creates a credential definition for "Verified Employee" with claims: employee ID, department, employment status

Step: 3
Actor: Employee
Action: Opens Microsoft Authenticator, scans the issuance QR code on the Woodgrove employee portal, signs in with Entra ID credentials

Step: 4
Actor: Woodgrove Entra
Action: Authenticates the employee, retrieves HR claims, signs the "Verified Employee" VC with the Key Vault key

Step: 5
Actor: Authenticator
Action: Stores the signed VC in the employee's wallet

Step: 6
Actor: Proseware
Action: Configures a verification request for "Verified Employee" issued by did:web:woodgrove.com

Step: 7
Actor: Employee
Action: Visits the Proseware portal, scans the verification QR code, reviews the request in Authenticator, and consents

Step: 8
Actor: Authenticator
Action: Assembles a VP signed with the employee's private key and sends it to the Proseware verifier service

Step: 9
Actor: Proseware
Action: Resolves did:web:woodgrove.com, retrieves Woodgrove's public key, verifies both the VC and VP signatures

Step: 10
Actor: Proseware
Action: Grants the employee access to the partner portal

No federation link. No guest account. No phone call to Woodgrove. Woodgrove's signature on the credential is all the trust Proseware needs.

Licensing

Microsoft Entra Verified ID follows a tiered consumption model rather than a single flat license:

- Basic issuance and verification: Covered under Verified ID's Baseline Protection, which includes up to 50,000 transactions per month at no additional cost (a transaction being any issuance, verification, or revocation). Beyond that volume, an Entra ID P1 or P2 (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/fundamentals/whatis#microsoft-entra-id-licensing) license is required to continue.
- Face Check: Requires the Microsoft Entra Suite (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/using-facecheck#licensing), which includes an allowance of 8 Face Check verifications per licensed seat per month, pooled at the tenant level across all Face Check scenarios, with additional checks billed per use beyond that allowance.
- Gating Access Packages with Verified ID: Part of Entra ID Governance / Entra Suite (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/id-governance/entitlement-management-verified-id-settings).

Because pricing and packaging change periodically, always confirm current figures against the Microsoft Entra Verified ID pricing page (https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/pricing/details/microsoft-entra-verified-id/) before budgeting a deployment.

Where to Go Next

The Microsoft Entra Verified ID documentation (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/) is the authoritative starting point for implementation. Key sections include:

- Plan your Verified ID deployment (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/verifiable-credentials-configure-tenant-quick)
- Configure the DID:Web trust system (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/how-to-register-didwebsite)
- Create a credential definition (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/verifiable-credentials-configure-issuer)
- Request a credential verification (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/verifiable-credentials-configure-verifier)
- Use Face Check with Verified ID (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/verified-id/using-facecheck)
- Require Verified ID for Access Packages (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/id-governance/entitlement-management-verified-id-settings)

For the underlying standards:
- W3C Verifiable Credentials Data Model (https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/)
- W3C DID Core specification (https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/)
- DIF ION on GitHub (https://github.com/decentralized-identity/ion)
- ION Explorer (https://identity.foundation/ion/explorer/)

Conclusion

Decentralized identity is not a single technology — it is a layered stack of open standards, cryptographic primitives, and distributed infrastructure. Understanding each layer helps explain why the system can work without a central authority.

- DIDs give every participant a self-owned, verifiable identifier.
- DID Documents publish the public keys needed to verify anything signed by that DID.
- The Trust System (did:web in Microsoft Entra Verified ID today) makes DID Documents available to any party without central coordination.
- W3C Verifiable Credentials define a tamper-evident structure for signed claims.
- OID4VCI and OID4VP define the protocols for issuing and presenting those credentials.
- Microsoft Entra Verified ID packages all of this into a managed service with Azure Key Vault for key management, Microsoft Authenticator as the wallet, and APIs for issuers and verifiers.
- Face Check extends the model to high-assurance scenarios by adding biometric liveness verification without sharing the biometric data with the verifier.

The architecture is designed so that trust is rooted in mathematics and open standards, not in the continued availability of any single service or vendor. That is what makes it genuinely different from federation or centralized identity, and what makes it the right foundation for the next generation of digital trust.
